Another character that appeared in these stories was Christian Prager. He
appeared in three of them. Do you plan to use him in anything else in the
future? Well, I once thought of taking those three, or is it four stories? I
don't remember how many, and using them as the basis of a novel. But I began to
feel that the Prager stories perhaps belong to the ecological 60s, and that
perhaps it was dated, although from what I've been hearing in recent years,
perhaps the ecological problem is such that they're not dated.
I like the character, and he was the character in my first story, The Water
Sculptor, and then he was a much younger version of himself in Assassins of Air,
and then in Parks of Reston Culture he was a little older, and there's an
interesting background there, but it's essentially the background of something
like The Sheep Look Up by John Brunner. Many writers were writing that kind of
ecological story in the 60s. I don't know. Are you sufficiently interested that
you would like to see a book incorporating those stories? Sure, he was quite
interesting, yeah. He was. Well, that's something that's never been said to me
about him. Speaking of that ecological 60s, the stories that you just mentioned
are quite bleak ecologically. Does this mirror your personal fears? Well, I tend
to believe that things could be very good. Human beings could do quite well with
their science and technology, and even though I'm a great believer in science
and technology, I still feel that we could very easily destroy ourselves. It's
not absolutely a foregone conclusion that we're going to do very well. So I'm
not bleak. I'm just critical.
The water sculptor, which featured Christian Prager, seemed to have some
elements in it that anticipated macrolife. Was that conscious or unconscious,
or are they there? The theme that I possibly inherited from Arthur C. Clarke is
that space travel will be the opening of space, both for exploration and science
as well as for industry, will lead to a renaissance of world culture. Now, this
happened quite clearly in the renaissance, when Columbus and all the other great
explorers opened up the new world. That was the age of Shakespeare. That was the
age of many of the scientists. It was a new opening of human possibility. And I
think that space travel will help create a different environment for the Earth.
I think much of the industry that will be space-based will help redeem the
planet from what we've done to it. And I think that that new environment, that
new world that will open up, will deposit a different
interior. It will deposit a new world in the human heart, is what I'm trying to
say. This is something that is not understood by many people, but any great
environmental change deposits a new world in the human mind and in the human
heart. And the possibility is certainly there that the future opening of space
and the further growth of science and technology might lead to a more humane
society. It's certainly a possibility, although it's not a foregone conclusion.
Okay, now we get to macrolife, which has got to be your crowning achievement so
far.
Is it... Okay, you have ambitions to write serious literate science fiction,
which kind of escapes the old moles. Is that... Are you satisfied that that's
what it is? Is that... Did you accomplish that? Well, I'll make the case for you
to decide. On the one hand, macrolife is an attempt not to simply produce the
illusion of thought that you get in a piece of science fiction, but to actually
bring in the thought, you know, not as a piece of bakery. Very often, thinking
and reasoning, which is very much a part of the human mind as much as feeling
and action, is simply brought in as a form of... as a sublimated kind of
material or gloss on the story. I wanted to bring in the actual thought, the
reasoning, the philosophizing, into a piece of science fiction. Now, this is at
odds with the traditional novel, which moves by action, by feeling, by
character, by metaphor, by image, although there's a good deal of that in macro
life also. But there's sufficient new material or material that some people
would find alien to fiction in the book to make it seem strange to many readers.
I have nothing against writing the traditional novel,
the slick kind of novel that many people like to read, you know, the so-called
good read. I have nothing really against that, but I think in macrolife I had
to do it this way. Perhaps in other books against the same background, I'll
write the more accessible kind of novel, even though I hope I'll be able to work
in more of the thought and the philosophy in different ways. If you approach
macrolife in the way I've just described, then you probably will have no
trouble reading it. But if you expect the traditional novel, the good read, you
may find that you have to work at it a little bit. The trouble is that science
fiction is a field where it professes to be a literature of ideas and a
literature of thinking, but yet when a writer brings in the thinking and the
ideas, people back off. They don't really want the actual experience of thinking
or of reasoning. But I believe that these things belong to human character as
much as feeling and acting. So why shouldn't it be there? I was quite surprised
at how deep the prejudice runs against this kind of thing. Some people are able
to pick up macrolife and read through it with fascination, which surprises me,
given the kind of climate I'm describing. And other people just can't seem to
get beyond three or four pages. One editor who was supposed to read it for a
possible paperback reprint confessed that he couldn't get beyond three or four
pages. And this guy has a PhD in literature. I was quite horrified to see this.
But I'm afraid that many such people are educated well beyond their
intelligence.
You can't hear my laughing because I have the button off. But that's good. Let's
talk a little bit about the background, the concept of macrolife. When did you
get the idea and how long did you mull it over before you put it to paper? Well,
afterwards, the hardcover gives the history of how I came upon it. I think I
read an article by G. Harry Stein, who was a real hard science kind of buff. And
he complained that all the really new ideas, this was around 1961, I think, he
complained that all the new ideas were being ignored by science fiction and that
the best speculations were going on places like General Electric and think tanks
and whatever. And the science fiction writers were 25 years behind the times. So
I looked at one of the ideas he mentioned, which was a concept called macro
life, two words. By Danbridge Cole. And this was for something called The
Ultimate Human Society. And Cole made a lot of sense to me. And so I decided
then that I was going to write a novel to be called macrolife. But over the
years, Cole died, I think, in 1965. But over the years, I developed the idea
much further than he had taken it. His macro worlds were on the order of the
Queen Mary, 10,000 tons, 10,000 ton world, but very small, probably closer to O
'Neill's concept of space colonies. By 600-kilometer egg shapes with dozens of
levels and asteroid cores at the center are much more ambitious than I think
Cole came up with. And also my primary interest was in the kind of social
systems that might develop within this material container. Because you could
have almost any kind of social system you want developing within the economic
supports that are provided by this concept of macrolife. The kind of self
-reproducing mobile space colony that is, in effect, a form of life. It moves,
it reproduces, it thinks with its human social component. The possibilities seem
endless, especially for something like the idea of revolt within the human
generations. Whenever people would get to the point of dissatisfaction with a
particular system they have, they would simply create another macro world
container using the resources and help of the parent to create their own society
within it. It seems to me that this would give the kind of conservatism and
stability that is demanded by human beings in the social system, as well as the
openness and sense of creativity and adventure that seems to be lacking from
social systems that become too old and don't want to change. It seems to be an
answer to the problem of what is life for.
It's likely to continue. If you want to say something more, sure, go ahead. I
think that pretty much covers it. I would think that the novel gets very deeply
into the variations on this basic approach.
It seems to me that there's nothing essentially impossible about developing this
kind of mobile society. It, of course, destroys a whole generation of science
fictional concepts which demand that we colonize the planets of other solar
systems where I feel if it were possible to do that, native life might be
developing or might one day develop and we would be preempting possible
biological evolution there. There's preempt for all that kind of science fiction
and, in fact, says that that'll never happen. A whole science fictional universe
dies if you take macrolife seriously.
That brings up a point. I wanted to talk to you primarily because I read macro
life and it is so terribly original because I've been brought up on the science
fiction that you just mentioned and it does seem to flush it. Do you think that
it has a shot, that this idea that unless a culture leaves its dirt world, it's
going to be static and not really expand as it could if it did get away and get
into something like a macro world? Well, if the resources of a planet are
limited and it has no space-based industry with which to supplement the
finitudes of a planetary surface, then I think the culture will suffer primarily
because of the finitude. As I said, an open, exploration-oriented, knowledge
-oriented, Renaissance culture deposits a different kind of world in the human
heart. A limited culture deposits an ecological 60s kind of approach in the
human heart. And I think there's a sense of constriction that would develop.
Take the idea of a zero-growth society. I see that as essentially static, both
materially and culturally in the long run. It would reach a kind of equilibrium
with its environment, recycling everything, and that would be the end, I would
think, of that kind of culture. There's no reason why, I mean, the sun's output
is tremendous. Even if macrolife were not to be mobile on the interstellar
level, we could certainly make better use of the sun space within our solar
system for this end. Before we leave the mechanics of writing macrolife, I want
to ask you, I know that the Cole article and the Stein article appeared in 1961.
Did you read these articles when they appeared? Have you been thinking about
this that long, or did you pick them up later? I was thinking about macrolife
ever since I read the articles. Because I immediately saw what could be done.
And I'm surprised that most science fiction writers still don't see it. They
still feel that people are going to colonize planets on a large scale. And I'm
afraid that's a very old, imperialistic idea of colonizing. I think there will
be people who will attempt to do something with planets, especially if we
develop terraforming techniques, say, for the transformation of Venus or the
Moon. That sort of thing will go on. But frankly, it's very difficult. It all
depends how much energy you have to play around with. But going to find solar
-like planets in other star systems, taking them over, that really strikes me as
a kind of abortion of possible life to come. So what we have here is a teenager
saw a possibility in a magazine that mature science fiction writers for two
decades afterwards never hit on. Yeah. By 1970, I had produced various drafts of
Part 1. and when I began writing professionally, I realized that I would have to
do this book sooner or later. And I decided I would do it. And I was always
amazed that someone else had not, one, taken the term or written anything quite
like this. Now, there are macro-life-like books within the field. Cities in
Flight by James Blish is sort of like that. But the cities don't reproduce. They
are old earth cities that simply have taken to wandering around. It's proto
-macro-life of one kind or another. The ideas have been around, but the kind of
coherent sociocultural approach that I think I've taken in that book, which will
be the basis of at least six or seven other novels, each are vastly different in
technique and form from macro-life, just has not been copied by anybody. And I
think that if they did copy it in the matter of, say, in a matter of six or
seven months or even a year, they could not possibly come up with everything
that I've thought of about it in the ten years that the actual writing took.
Most of the writing took what happened between 1970 and 1979.
So it's very strange. I've had such drastic reactions to the book, utter hatred
or utter praise, that I can only echo what I think it was Oscar Wilde said, that
when the critics disagree, the artist should be at peace.
You had this idea for years. You wrote on it for ten years. So you obviously
were very enthusiastic about the idea. In the writing, when I read it, I could
tell at times that you could barely restrain your enthusiasm for the idea that
you had. You didn't ever get preachy at all, but is it difficult to contain your
enthusiasm sometimes and maintain this dispassionate prose? And we can see the
emotions under there, but I think it'd be hard to control them sometimes. Well,
one of the difficulties I had is that Harper and Rowan was not going to produce
a book much over 150,000 words. I could very easily have produced a book of 1
,000 printed pages, and perhaps that might have been more interesting. There
might have been more room for character and personal development. I think it was
Arthur C. Clarke who, in addition to his enthusiasm for the book, complimented me
on striking a balance between the art-Stapledonian vistas and the personal
concerns of the characters. And he put his finger on it. The problem with the
book was to strike some kind of balance between the demands of thought and the
demands of art, or the demands of fiction and the demands of exposition. But I
think a reader can best understand this book if they don't have a preset notion
as to what constitutes fiction and what constitutes science fiction and how much
work they're willing to do in the reading of it. I don't really think it's all
that difficult a book to read.
The original material that you write in the near future, is that going to be
pretty much in this macro world universe? Well, I have quite a number of books
that I have planned, many of them vastly different from anything remotely
connected with macrolife. But there'll be at least six books against the macro
life background. I think there's sufficient response from readers and sufficient
appreciation from readers. There's a total of about 70 reviews of the book
worldwide, and I think, oh, maybe half a dozen of them were the nasty kind that
I would get from magazines like Locus or from people like John Clute, neither of
the great reviewers. Put next to the positive reactions, these are lost
completely.
To answer your question more specifically, I have many other novels planned. I
think I have about 20 novel projects that I've not developed to the point of
submission. Some of them will be very, very different. I can't really go into
them right now. I assume that they'll be different than what I've done to date.
When you have all these ideas floating around in your head, written on your
notebook, do you tend to get impatient and want to get them all down at once? Is
it hard to be patient and realize this is a lifelong process? That's probably
the worst part of it is that I signed up, I contracted for many, many books
during my late 20s. And now I am developing in my notebooks books that I think
are, grow out of much more mature impulses. And yet, I'm still burdened with the
completion of contracts that demand that I be faithful to an earlier writer's
vision.
Ursula Le Guin told me that you have to get past these books. So they must be
done in one way or another. But I'm nowhere near being able to write the kinds
of books that I am planning, say, this year or that I planned last year. There
are half a dozen of them that are like that. And I think they grow out of a
stronger command of technique and a greater sense of human character. Just a
more mature writer is developing these books. And I won't be able to get to them
until the year after next at the very least. So I'm terribly impatient.
Sometimes I feel that I'll never get to them. And there are a few books I want
to write that have nothing to do with science fiction. I think every writer of
science fiction who is any good begins to feel that here is a certain kind of
writing that has just about swallowed up the possibility of doing a more
authentic kind of work that grows directly out of your own experience that
belongs to your own time and your own personal experience.
You know, you read to find writers of the 20th century who do not write science
fiction and if you're at all imaginative or discerning you'll see the enormity
of their achievement. And if you want to play in that ballpark too you may not
have the ability I think to some degree science fiction sets you apart from that
tradition. But if you're a good writer I think you will feel the call of that.
Primarily every writer should first think of themselves as a writer and then
think of themselves as someone who happens to have written some science fiction
or some poetry or short fiction or historical fiction or detective fiction or
whatever. You have to think of yourself as a writer first.
What's your definition of science fiction? Oh, I think Isaac Asimov came up with
about the best one I've ever seen and I've developed I've explained it a little
more to myself and it simply goes like this that science fiction is about those
aspects of future developments in science and technology or perhaps in any field
of human inquiry. It's about the human impact of future developments.
developments. The human impact makes it fiction and the future developments
makes it science fiction. I think if you stress each of those equally human
developments and future possibilities then you have a science fiction that is
continuous with the rest of literature. It is not something that is antagonistic
towards contemporary fiction or towards any other kind of science fiction. I'm
afraid that too often genre fiction plays with ideas and has a very childish
naive attitude towards the humanity depicted in stories.
Where do you see the genre heading and in actuality and where would you like to
see it heading? Well I think it will pretty much stay the way it is. According
to that definition you will always have literate science fiction and you will
always have the genre entertainment which should develop a certain level of
cleverness and perhaps even a certain level of gripping vision. but if you don't
have the human impact the human you know the explorations of the human heart or
the world the new world that are deposited in the human heart and in the human
mind and if you don't have a certain degree of psychological sophistication then
you will not have literature. Now happily there has always been a literate high
tradition of science fiction from H.T. Weldon and there has always been the
tradition of junkie science fiction. I have no great fear of the so-called
junkie science fiction or the dyed-in-the-wool genre fiction as long as it's
well-crafted and shows a certain level of intelligence it does not have to fail
in those respects. Somebody like Keith Laumer for example shows enormous
craftsmanship. John Brunner and some of his so-called lesser books showed
enormous craft and intelligence in the working out of genre materials. There's
really nothing wrong with doing that. It only gets objectionable when it
dominates the field to the tune of 99% and the serious or literate science
fiction is just about squeezed out or when some sort of climate develops of
absolute hatred for that kind of work. Let's put it this way. Any kind of
literature is a record of how people regard themselves and in the case of
science fiction how people regard the future. 150 years from now the science
fiction of today will be a record a testimony of how what we feared about the
future what we hoped for the future and what we planned for the future and
that's what makes literature that it bears some kind of testimony to the
concerns of its time and this is a time that is very future oriented so we
should have a literature that does that a literature which seeks to take all of
these serious hopes and fears and to turn it into nothing more than Boy Scouts
Among the Stars or some sort of pinball game is just betraying everything that I
think is ultimately of interest to a reader. It might be fun, it might be well
done, but I think more things can be fun than that. The sense that we are in
some way envisioning or perhaps contributing to our own futures is I think much
more satisfying, much more fun, much more pleasurable than simply masturbating
with a series of conventions.
To conclude, just briefly, I think we'll always have the one kind
of science fiction and the other, just as we'll always have the junky
contemporary fiction and the serious literature. They'll be the ones that get
the Nobel Prizes and the others. Happily, we do have at least a half a dozen
major figures who write science fiction. Gene Wolfe, Philip K., the late Philip
K. Dick, Ursula Le Guin, Stanislaw Lem, even Clarke, who deserve to be taken
seriously down the line.
Okay. One question that I came up with, now that we're at the conclusion, I
wanted to ask you about. This is back on MacroLife again. You reported in, in
the afterward to MacroLife that Paulo Solari's concept of arcologies inspired
your name, your naming the first macro world astrome. What's the background on
that? Well, the arcologies of Solari are just simply a form of land-bound macro
life. They are, as he puts it, as one critic put it, they are containers for the
human condition. In other words, the material supports for a kind of living. And
Danric Cole, who also said that things like submarines or cities, for example, a
city is basically an initial form of macrolife, since it concentrates human
abilities and human aspirations, declares a kind of independence from the
countryside. I use this image in the book by saying that macrolife is the
ultimate independence of the city from the countryside, natural planets being
countryside, and macro worlds being cities, except that now they're self
-sufficient, whereas the cities on the surface of the earth still depend on the
countryside for their food and energy and whatever. So Solari's arcologies are
simply a better form of city, a more efficient, humane form of city that just
doesn't grow any which way, but which is planned. Contrary to the way people
regard Solari's arcologies, they think of them as vast beehives, but they're
not. They are basically containers, structures, you could take almost any kind
of building structures and put them on the shelves of the arcologies. You could
take cities, but you could take buildings that perhaps were common designs in
the 19th century, two story wooden frame houses, and put them right onto the
shelves of the arcologies. They're open, they're not crowded, they make use of
gravitational drops, waste disposal, they use land area efficiently so that the
rest of the planet can go back to greenery if that's what they want. People
would not really be confined in these cities, they would be able to leave them.
I think they are a form of city that we have simply not tried yet. In that sense
they're related to macrolife in the sense that cities are an initial form of
macrolife.